WIP:  React Week 1 - Hooks (#731)
Ada-Developers-Academy/textbook-curriculum: React/nested-event-handling.md

This would also let us later do things like reorder, sort or remove students.

**Question:** Currently why can't the `App` component see the current present or absent status of a student?

<details>
<summary>Our Answer</summary>

Because _state_ is internal to the component, parent components have no visibility into it.  They can only see the props that they pass in. 

Instead, we will _lift_ the state out of the `Student` component into the `App` component. This is a very common technique when managing a list of components in React: all the state lives in a parent component.
</details>

#### Adding State to App

We will begin by modifying App to store the student list in state.  First import `useState` from react.

```javascript
import React, { useState } from 'react';
```

Then in the App component we can call `useState` and send the students array as props to `StudentCollection`.

```javascript
function App () {
  const [studentList, setStudentList] = useState(students);

  return (
    <div className="App">
      <StudentCollection students={studentList} />
    </div>
  );
}
```

We can now verify that the app still works as normal.  

> We can also add a function to change a student.  To make things easier we can add an `id` field to each student object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can also add a function to change a student.  In addition, to make things easier we can add an `id` field to each student object.
```

```javascript
// src/App.js
// ...

const students = [
  {
    id: 1,
    fullName: "Ada Lovelace",
    email: "ada@lovelace.uk",
    present: true,
  },
  {
    id: 2,
    fullName: "Katherine Johnson",
    email: "kat@nasa.gov",
    present: false,
  },
];

function App () {
  const [studentList, setStudentList] = useState(students);

  const updateStudent = (updatedStudent) => {
    const students = [];

    studentList.forEach((student) => {
      if (student.id === updatedStudent.id) {
        students.push(updatedStudent);
      } else {
        students.push(student);
      }
    });

    setStudentList(students);
  }
  
  return (
    <div className="App">
      <StudentCollection students={studentList} onUpdateStudent={updateStudent} />
    </div>
  );
}
```

**Question**:  The `updateStudent` function creates a new array to pass in when it calls `setStudentList`?  Why?  What happens when you only modify the correct element of `studentList`?

<details>
  <summary>Our answer</summary>

>   `setStudentList` a method `useState` provides to change the state first checks to see if the new state is different from the old state.  However it does not do a deep comparison for performance reasons.  Instead it checks to see if the new value references the same memory address as the old.  If so it does... NOTHING.  Therefore you need to pass in a new object to update state.  If you do not... nothing will change.

Reviewer: Sorry, I'm having trouble understanding what this is saying

Reviewer: I think you missed this since github decided to collapse it.

Author: Ok I've rephrased it.

  const onButtonClick = () => {
    // Updated below
  }

  const onFullNameInputChange = (event) => {
    // Updated below
  };

  // Component functions always return JSX
  return (
    <div>
      <h3>{props.fullName}</h3>
      <input value={props.fullName} onChange={onFullNameInputChange} />
      <ul>
        <li>Class: C13</li>
        <li>Birthday: {props.birthday}</li>
        <li>Email: {props.email}</li>
      </ul>
      <button onClick={onButtonClick}>
        Mark {props.present ? 'Absent' : 'Present'}
      </button>
    </div>
  );
};
```

## Prop callback functions

So now our Student component gets information from `App` and `StudentCollection`, but still needs to tell `App` when to change this particular student.  Additionally, we'll add some CSS so that students who have been marked "present" will be identified to the user.

There are a few things to consider when making this change to our application. Think about these questions with your neighbors.

1. Which component should contain the button that will enable us to mark an individual student as "present"?
2. Which component is managing the student data?
3. Is the answer to #1 the same as #2?

> If you answered NO to question #3, you're on to something big. The data related to the students is tracked in `App` while the button to mark an individual student "present" should really be on each individual `Student` component. Our challenge then is to use the tools we have been given to _propagate_ the button press event from one component to another.

Reviewer: I'm inclined to suggest hiding this with a details/summary block since it feels a lot like an answer to a question we want them to contemplate on their own

Reviewer: I think you missed this since github decided to collapse it.

> #### The CSS

Reviewer: This bit feels to me like a confusing interjection. Would it be alright if we moved it down, after we've fully handled state and callbacks.

Reviewer: I think you missed this since github decided to collapse it.

}
```

> #### Adding className for styling

Reviewer: This would need to be moved along with it.

Reviewer: I think you missed this since github decided to collapse it.

Next, let's modify the `Student` component to use the `present` property, to style the component.

```javascript
// src/components/Student.js
 // ...
    <div className="student">
      <h3 className={props.present ? 'present' : 'absent'}>{props.fullName}</h3>
 // ...
```

Change the initial state in the `App` to verify this works as intended.

#### The Event Handler

Next, let's explore the event handler setup. What data do we need from the button click event to appropriately change the overall student's state?

1. An Event Handler in the `Student.js` file, we can use `onButtonClick` and `onFullNameInputChange`.
1. A function that has access to the state inside of `App.js`.

First we will modify the `onButtonClick` as follows.

```javascript
const onButtonClick = () => {
    const updatedStudent = {
      fullName: props.fullName,
      birthday: props.birthday,
      email: props.email,
      // Toggle present to a new value
      present: !props.present,
      id: props.id,
    }

    // call the function passed from `App`

>     props.onUpdateStudent(updatedStudent);

Reviewer: This callback right here feels like a monumental new concept to students. Can we give more explanation to explicitly state this is a call to the function we created in `App`?

Author: There's quite a bit on this below, but I've added more.

  }
```

> **Question:** What piece of data is going to help us determine exactly which student should be updated?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Question:** Once we call `onUpdateStudent`, execution will be passed back to the `App` component. What piece of data is going to help the `App` component determine exactly which student should be updated?
```

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
The student we are interested in updating is something we can match using `props.id`. 
</details>

**Question:** Wait, why does this work at all? Shouldn't we lose access to `props` in the onButtonClick function due to scope?

<details>
<summary>Answer</summary>
`onButtonClick` is closed around `props`, so the `props` variable is still accessible! Remember, all we need to close is three things:

1. Nest a function inside a function
1. Reference a variable from the outer function in the inner function
1. Make the inner function available outside the outer function

> 1. `onButtonClick` is nested inside of `Student`

Reviewer: I think this is intended to be 1,2,3 but it's rendering as 4,5,6. Perhaps an additional newline would fix this problem.

Author: Fixed, and thanks!

1. We reference `props` inside of `onButtonClick`
1. We hand `onButtonClick` to the `<button>`, where it lives on after `Student` has finished running!
</details>

### Event Handling Summary

Wow, that was kind of complex. Let's look at a diagram of what's going on.

![State management with callbacks](images/state-management-with-callbacks.png)

<!-- https://drive.google.com/file/d/1dyNbUUe_6rkrSEG_lPKJGiwAAOGIHQ5_/view?usp=sharing -->

**On the left in orange** is the setup. Information is passed from parent components to child components at `render` time using `props`.

- `App` provides a list of students to `StudentCollection`

> - `StudentCollection` gives `Student`:

Reviewer: We need to adjust this since there isn't a `StudentCollection` anymore.

Author: Actually there is it forwards individual student data to each student component.
